From Hanselman it's dot com
it's Hansel minutes or weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 55 recorded Monday,
March 12th, 2007. Support for Hanselman it's
is provided by Tellerik rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications online@wwwdottlerikdotcomandby.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott discusses monorail
with Aaron Jensen and Jacob Llewellyn
of Ellucian technologies. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
the podcast. It doesn't waste
your time. I'm sitting here
with Erin Jensen and Jacob
Llewellyn from Ellucian technologies. And
we're going to talk about
something wacky and crazy called
monorail. And I say that
with the tongue placed firmly
in cheek, but you know,
I'm going to ask you
that net guy, and I
wanted to hear about some
of the alternative ways that
people are building applications on
asp.net. So when we're talking
about monorail, so what is
monorail and why should I
care? Well, maybe I should
talk about why we switched
off of forum. So we
started out doing a web
forums and it worked, I
mean, we actually looked at
monorail initially and decided, nah,
we don't really know what
that is. Let's not really
look into it. And so
we started doing web forums.
I mean, all the controls
are available and magic happens
with the view state and
the post backs. And we
just kind of found as
we were writing our pages,
that the view state was
a bit heavier than we
liked. So we looked into
turning it off so you
can turn it off when
you don't need it. And
then, then we realized, Oh,
wait, there's still this control
state. There's still these wacky
IDs, you know, repeater, underscore
repeater, underscored, text box, et
cetera, et cetera, which makes
doing any sort of Ajax
or any sort of JavaScript
on the, on the client,
a lot more difficult. The,
just the whole post-back mechanism
and the, in the view
state just kinda killed us.
I mean, it, it, it
made things a lot more
difficult than we liked and,
and combined with the fact
that controls were rendered in
ways we didn't like with
span tags for labels. And,
and I know now they
have those, the new control
rendering, just going to ask
you like, so the controls
don't render that way and
you can put in control
adapters and things like that.
Yeah. Yeah. So the control
adopters, that was that's fairly
new. And I think when
we, when we started, there
was one available. So we
didn't really ever look into
those, but we started looking
in a again and, and
the way monorail works is
it's just a lot easier
to follow. And once you
understand it, and essentially what
it does is it, you
set up a HTTP handler
that is just a front
controller that will take all
of your dot rails requests
and for them to inappropriate
controller, a monorail controller. So
in monorail, you've got three
main things that are important
areas, controllers, and actions. And
so a controller lives in
an area areas kind of
like a namespace, we, which
we wish it was tied
to. Namespaces more than that.
So slow down, I'm not
very clever. There's a HTTP
handler that handles any extension
that is a dot rails
extension. And I'm sure you
can probably have other things
that live alongside so you
can have.foo and not SPX,
but dot rails is the
phrase you said the term
front controller. So we're talking
model view, controller, model three
type stuff. That kind of
stuff that Java guys are
used to, right? Yeah. Is
it model view controller or
is it just view It's
model view controller? I mean,
your model is your object
model. So what are these
terms area that you just
said? So areas is a,
it's like a namespace, it's
a, it's a group of
controllers. Most things live in
the, you know, default area.
But I, for example, we've
got a student area teacher
area, a manager area. And
so like, you'd have the
student take test control or
the, the evaluation controller and
that would live within the
student area. So it's just
a grouping for controllers. Okay.
So if I'm going to
put this in the terms
that like the Northwind database,
right. You know, about like
customers and orders and stuff,
so I'd have a customary
order areas, stuff like that,
but is it that apply
to the, to the UI
or does it apply to
the model? It's more to
the UI? So, I mean,
it's an area what you
see as a user and
an area becomes a directory
in, in your HTML. So
if your www.ellucian.com/student/placement/index.rails. And so
w if you don't have
the areas, then everything is,
it would just be your
controller name. So it allows
you to break it into
different directories. It's, it's just
a maintainability aspect. Okay. I'm
still not following. Maybe you
can, maybe, maybe you can
help. I think it's, it's,
it's a minor thing really.
I mean, all you're doing
is, like Erin said, you're,
you're just providing a way
to, to group controllers into,
you know, areas where, you
know, related controllers into an
area, you know, under ASP,
you can make new folders
and put ASP Xs under
them. This is how you
group them under monorail. You
put them in an area.
So if I'm doing a
Northwind database and I want
to go to the customers
page, and I want a
grid with a bunch of
customers, you know, so in
asp.net, I go file new
page customer, not SPX. I
drag a data grid over
maybe David shore, select star
from customers bind to the
data grid. And then I've
got a bunch of stuff
in a grid. How do
I do that in monorail,
under monorail? You probably just
have a customer controller. And,
you know, I don't, I
don't know that that the
North wind scenario is complicated
enough to warrant, you know,
a bunch of different areas.
What's a better room. What
are like a real web
application. So you're doing well
in our situation. You know,
we have, we have a
top level area. And then
we've, we grouped our controllers
into, into areas where, you
know, specific to roles, you
know, like for, for administrators
would go to these to
go to this. We have
under this area, they would
have a bunch of controllers
related to, you know, tasks
that they can carry out.
You know, students, you know,
that they would have, their
controllers would be under, you
know, an area, you know,
related to their tasks. It's,
it's very simple, just a
way to organize the controllers,
which are really the important
part of, you know, monorail.
So our controllers related directly
to your eyes to URLs.
Yes. All three things. I
mentioned areas, controllers and actions
are related to two URLs,
what monorail does. And when
it's, when it's parsing a
URL is take the first,
the, the directory is leading
up to the V the
last directory, the deepest directory,
and that's becomes the area.
The deepest directory is the
controller's name. And then the
index dot rails or manage
users dot rails, or what
have you, is the action.
So the, the thing with
the dot rails extension is
the action. There's actually no
file called user management dot
rails. It doesn't exist. And
so that, that action is,
is essentially a method. I
mean, it is a method
that gets called on the
controller and Okay, so that's
good. So then I'm in,
in, in asp.net world, in
my brain, I've got the
grid for taking a test
or adding some information about
a student. Maybe I'm going
to update student. So I'm
on a student page, I'm
gonna change his name, hit
update student and asp.net. We
do a postbac. So we're
doing an HTTP post with
a bunch of control, control,
state view, state, and additional
information that was on the
page. We're going to post
it back to our page.
It's going to get picked
up at the same page.
And then we're going to
fire some studio events on
the server side. How does
that whole post-bac process? It
wouldn't be a post-bac process,
but how does that, I
pushed the button process work
for that same scenario in
monorail. So in monorail, you're,
you've got a lot of
freedom, right? I mean, you
can use Ajax, you can
use a post, you can
use a get, and you
can use whatever you want
to, to call a, an
action. And so let's say
your action is update user,
and you want to, you're
just changing the user's username.
That's the only field you
update. So you would do
a, you would create a
form and the forms action
it's submit action would be
a post to update user
dot rails. And in the
form parameters you have in
the form values, you have
whatever you need to update
the user dot rails. And,
and that would call the
user dot rails or the
user action on the user
management controller. And that, that
action would then do what
it needs to do. It
would update the database, show
an error, unnecessary, and then
it would, it would redirect,
or so the other thing
I'll back up a bit.
The other thing that's in
a monorail, that's important as
views. So not only do
you have your controller action,
an area, but the only
what's shown to the user
as a view, and by
default, you have a one
to one mapping between your
actions and your views. So
if you have index dot
rails, you'd have an index
dot VM or brail or
whatever view engine you're using.
There's multiple view engines. But
so we use, we use
braille. So you'd have a
index dot braille, and that
would be your HTML. It's
just a simple template using
the boot language. And like
I said, you can use
any velocity if you don't
like BU but so you've
got, you've got that, that
gets rendered. And, and I
can talk more about how,
how things get rendered between,
or how data gets passed
from the controller to the
view. But essentially once you
did the post in the,
to update user, it would
send them back to the
index dot rails. So they
would just redirect to index
dot rails. I should mention
that the foreign values that
are, that are posted are
fed as arguments to, to
the action method. So, you
know, very simply if you're
just doing username, you just
have a string argument with
the same name as the
form value, and there are
more complex ways to, you
know, to, to bind, you
know, there's a data bind
system in, in monorail that
lets you do complex binding
on, you know, transfer objects
or, you know, other view
objects that you may need
to, to use to more
express, you know, the data
and all that kind of
thing. Okay. So within the
context of asp.net, if I
have a input name, input
type equals text name equals
Fu, that's going to show
up in whatever text box
on the server side also
has the name Fu so
you have a similar kind
of implicit binding based on
name, but then also additional
explicit mining's based on attributes
or, Well, it's, it's always,
it's always based on name.
The, the method of binding
is what varies. So the
default binding would, you know,
you're, you would just have
a, a method, an action
method that has a string
username and an ant user
ID. You can do more
complicated things like have a
user object. That's just a
DTO, just a simple view
object that has an ID
and a name property. And
then you would in your,
in your view, and when
you're, when you're referencing them
on the form, you do
user.id or user.name, and it
would actually do that data
binding behind the scenes so
that you get a user
object with those properties filled
in. You can do even
cooler things. Like if you're
just referencing a user like
you can, instead of passing
the ID in a DTO,
you do what we do.
It's called like, what do
we call it? Entity In
the action method. One of
the arguments is actually one
of our hibernate entities. And
if, if there is a
value in the form with
the same name as that,
that argument, and it is
the primary key for that
entity, then it will automatically,
you know, do an in
hibernate load and pass that
in. So we never have
to deal with these primary
keys and, you know, passing
all these identities around now
is the use of an
hibernate required or traditional within
the context of monorail. It's,
it's not required a lot
of, a lot of stuff's
really optional there's inversion of
control container. It's a monorail
itself as part of a
larger framework called castle. And
they have their own inversion
of control container that you
can use with monorail. It's
used as optional, which is
something we don't quite like.
We would like it to
be mandatory, but you know,
there's a few other components
that they, that they push.
One of them is a,
is active record. And that's
a, it's a framework built
on top of an hibernate
that allows you to it's.
I mean, it's similar to
the active record stuff in
Ruby, and it allows you
to map to a database
and just attribute your classes
and say, you know, this
property maps to that database
field. And, and they've actually
got an active record data
binder, like the one we
wrote for just straight in
hibernate, and that will allow
you to get an active
record entity as a query
string parameter, even though it's
actually only an ID in
the query string. So talk
to me more about this
inversion of control. This is
the, they call it the
Windsor container. I think that
inversion of control might be
something that a lot of
people are not really familiar
with. And how is that
different than just like a,
just a service factory? The
main thing with inversion of
control is, is you're when
you're writing lots of code
and you want to test
that code, you want a
unit test that code, lots
of times a service will
depend on other services and,
you know, in version control.
It's a good question, huh?
I mean, how do you,
I can just go a
foo foo a equals new
Fu what's wrong with that?
Well, a lot of the
time food is going to
take, you know, a bar.
So you'll be doing new
food, you know, passing a
new bar in and you
know, Well, it's tobacco even
more that's, that's not the
traditional way. The traditional way
is within foods, constructor, you
instantiate a new bar. And
so now Fu has a
bar and fruit is going
to use bar to calculate
through bar. And it, if
you want to test Fu
on its own, you cannot
in, in C sharp. You
just, you can't do it
because bar is already instantiated.
It's always the same bar.
If you want to mock
bar, then you need to
basically rewrite the class to
accept bar as a constructor
argument or as like type
mock or you could use
Taimak, But That's a bit
of a heavy stick when
compared to something that's already
testable. And so, I mean,
we use rhino mocks here.
We're very happy with it.
And if you're designing for
testability, which I know some
people disagree with, then we're,
you don't run into that
problem. You don't have to
use tight mock to mock
private private methods, or everything's
going to be accessible and
testable. Okay. So now bring
it all back around to
inversion version of control. So
once you've got the, your
food class accepting a bar
class, and more likely, it's
going to be accepting an
IBR interface so that you
can more easily market that
way. You're not tied to
always having virtual methods. You
can just do an interface.
You mock the interface itself
rather than the, the instance
of the class. Once you
have that, you run into
things where let's say food
depends on bar, which depends
on blah and yada. And
then so you're in San
creation would look like new
Fu new bar, which takes
new yadda new. And it's
just, it just gets huge
and unwieldy and across a
large system it's it's even
worse. So what in a
version of control framework does
is allows you to take
all of those things, all
of those dependencies and put
them into one container. And
then once they're in that
container, you, you asked the
container had given me a
Fu it's going to look
at fruits. Constructor realized that
fruit takes a bar. So
it's going to instantiate a
bar, but it's going to
look at bars constructor and
realize that it takes a
block and a yada. And
so it's going to instantiate
blahs and Jada's and put
those into the bar and
then put that bar into
Fu. So what you get
back is just a food
that has everything it needs.
And if you want to
test through, instead of asking
the container for it, unless
it's an auto mocking container,
then you ask you just
instantiate one and pass it
in box and the, in
the constructor. So the, the
resulting food that's been created
and all of the things
within that dependency framework that
the dependency injection framework has,
has, has gleaned. These are
all mocked versions. You've told
the dependency framework. When I
asked for a Fu I
want those other three dependencies
to be mocked or So
in, in the application itself,
they're not mocked, obviously they're,
they're, they're full versions of
it in our testing framework.
Typically what we do is
we just create the mocks
and pass them into the
constructors. The container does not
enter into it. Jacob worked
on something that we're kind
of experimenting with. That's a,
it's an auto mocking container
where you can ask the
container for a real instance
of Fu and it'll automatically
instantiate mocks for each of
the types of food requires
a it's pretty slick. And
we haven't used it too
much in practice. He just
wrote it. And we're probably
going to start playing with
it. We're concerned about performance
a little, but it's, it's
not that heavy because the
main problem with containers, the
main overhead is actually putting
things into that container. And
with the auto mocking container,
you don't actually put anything
into it. It just infers
the, for the, the one
thing you're instantiating. Okay. So
I'm starting to get an
idea of how this works
and is this easier to,
it's obviously easier to test.
It's easier to maintain Absolutely.
I mean, with ASP net,
and one of the things
you run into is an
issue. The page life cycle
is complicated. I mean, there's
a reason there's like tons
of charts and books dedicated
to just the page life
cycle. One of those, thanks
for that. Well, that's, that's
a no fault. I mean,
that's not your fault, right?
You're, you're helping people understand
it and that's good. So
in monorail, the page life
cycles really easy. You get
a method called your action
is called and you do
things in that action. And
the result of that action,
you know, you've got your
side effects, your database saves
what have your reads, and
then you end up either
redirecting them to a page
or rendering a view within
your controller, or, I mean,
essentially it's, it's, it's always,
you know, you're returning some
sort of response. Usually it's
a view. So it sounds
like because the views and
the controllers are much more
separate than they are in
the terms of a markup
and a code behind that.
You can test this without
bringing up a browser or
using water or any kind
of a browser automation framework.
Cause you just make controllers
and they don't really care
what's going on. Do they
know about HTTP context? Because
then I start getting into
state cookies query, you know,
when do you, when do
you break the fourth wall?
And this beautiful thing starts
crashing down because you've decided
to reach into a cookie
somewhere. So with the controller,
the controller has, you know,
access to the response and
the request. It can get
cookies, it can get query
string. I can get form
values directly. Luckily most of
those things come in as
parameters. You can actually make
a cookie parameter and it'll,
it'll take the value of
that cookie that bit us,
when we had a, we
didn't know this, we had
a locale query string parameter,
and a locale cookie that
with the same name and
we actually got an array
of it. And so we
learned that when the hard
way, but it's pretty slick
because, you know, you can
just add a parameter for
your cookie. If you want
to access it directly. If
you want to write a
cookie, you do have access
to the response and the
request it's, they're all contained
within the rails engine context.
And so part of the
testability concerns is how do
you test cookies? How do
you test response? And we've
got some pretty creative ways
to handle those out of
the box. Monorail isn't as
testable as we'd like. We've
been working with Hamilton over
at the council project to,
to kind of make it
more testable. And essentially in
order to, to test it,
you can't, you want to
create a controller and you
want to have complete access
over the cookies. And so
you want to essentially be
able to mock that cookie
collection. And by default, you
don't have access to that.
Hamilton just made a few
methods that were previously internal
public. And so you can
now you now have access
to those. So you can
now mock the, the entire
rails engine context. So you
said, you keep saying cookie
collection, but we're not talking
necessarily about system that web,
that HDP cooking collection area.
We're talking about a collection
of cookies. I'm wondering how
much system dot web dependency
there is in, in the
controller itself. IRL is engine
context. The default one has
a I response and I
requests, you know, there's properties
with those, the return, those
values, and they have their
own, those are their, their
own monorail interfaces. They have
adapters that wrap the, the
HTP context dot current stuff.
And that's how most of
that stuff has done. Yeah.
We've had a lot of
trouble trying to mock HTP
context, and I know that
people really want to be
able to basically test an
entire web application without ever
using the web to do
it. And I've just decided
that that's not possible kind
of, I'm going to say
decided until I decide otherwise.
And we just basically use
water. We, we automate I
E what, what better way
to why Mach, when you
can just integrate is kind
of my perspective. The reason
is we can write, we
can develop our controllers, our,
our code behind essentially in
the asp.net world. We can,
we can develop that entirely
using TDD. We can set
up all of our responses,
all, all of our expectations.
We can set all of
that up without ever running
IIS. And the reason that's
nice is because our tests,
you know, run a thousand
tests per 30 seconds, instead
of, you know, instead of
the standard in Sanchez, I
S N I E and
I, and water tests are
great and there's a place
for them there. I'm not
saying that we get rid
of them, but they, they
really test the view and
that's what they should test
and, and the, the end
to end. So they should
test, you know, that that
button appears. And then I
can click on that button.
And then when I click
on that button after, you
know, a second and then
a new page comes up,
that's, there's a place for
that. But as far as
just testing behavior, just testing
that the controller asks the
Dow factory for a user
down requests, a user, and
then saves that user. I
just testing that is something
that you should be able
to do with unit tests.
And you can with monorail
complete, Do you have a
thousand tests? We have over
3000. So what's the percentage
of lines of code and
tests versus not in test
the ratio. That's a good
question. I don't know that
I had, we haven't. I
mean, it's probably at least
50%, if not more. Yes.
50% of the code that
you've written is tests. Yeah.
So it's one to two
tests to code. Yeah. Cool.
Rock on. What else are
we missing? What else haven't
we talked about trying to
make this accessible to the
listener. So guy, you know,
someone's listening, he's driving to
work right now. And he
works for the Nebraska department
of forestry and they use
ESPN. Now, how is he
going to go and sell
this to his boss? Does
he just need to do
it, tell his boss later
that he did it using
a nonstandard thing? How, how
did they get started? I
mean, they can go and
they can download it and
they can fool around, but
what's the best way for
them to really crock what's
going on in Monterey and
decide whether it's right for
them. So I'm in the
best way is really to
just dive in and give
it a shot. I mean,
we, I mentioned that we
used asp.net. We now are
using both web forms and
a monorail. And the reason
is that we just don't
have the time or resources
to convert all of our
web forms, pages to monorail,
nor do we really need
to. I mean, if, if
they're working, they're working, we
tried some model view presenters
things with web forms, and
that would allow us to
better test the, the logic
within a, within a code
behind it. It wasn't as
good as we wanted it
to be. And, and so
that's why we moved to
monorail, but I mean, you
can completely run web forms
and monorail side-by-side. We have
ASP X pages, we have
dot rails pages. They link
to each other. We actually
have a master page. And
then monorail has something called
a layout, which is just
a master page. And we
maintain them both as do
we maintain two different navigation
controls. It's kind of a
headache. We would love to
be rid of web forms,
but cause I mean that
maintainability is more obnoxious, but
I mean, it was well
worth the investment and the
overhead. Do you think that
monorail is kind of a,
I wasn't gonna say doomed,
but I'll just say, is
it going to be always
relegated to an alternative lifestyle?
I hope not. I mean,
it's, I think asp.net and
web forums is going to
have to, to change. I
mean, I think that, that
there's, there's gotta be changed
in the wind. I mean,
they've got to know that
that, that whole, the whole
view state, the post-bacc thing
is it's, it's great for
demos. The drag and drop
is like, it's really impressive.
But when you try to
write a real application with
it, it kinda starts to
break down and it, and
it's just, it's not as
testable. It's not as maintainable.
I think that, that it
with asp.net, Ajax, I mean,
Microsoft kind of heading in
the right direction and hopefully
some changes will happen, but
with monorail it's, I mean,
it's here to stay. I
mean, and it's, yeah, it's
an alternative right now, but
yeah. Is there any movement,
I mean, you guys are
using HTP handlers, but so
you're beholden to asp.net. This
could certainly be a nice,
happy extension. Is there any
movement of getting out of,
out of the web dot
config file and somewhere else?
I don't know that there
really needs to be. I
mean, yeah, right now, especially
in our scenario, since we're
using both, it makes sense
to use both. And I
mean, there's a lot of
stuff in system dot web,
and that is useful. I
mean, we still use the
membership provider. Like we, we
use that to log in
and to, to create, do
we still use it to
create users? No. No. Okay.
We just use it to
log in, but, but we
still use it. And so,
I mean, there is, there
are useful things there. It's
not, it's not a wash.
Cool. I'm sure Scott Guthrie will
be happy to hear that
when he listens to this
podcast, guys, I really appreciate
you taking the time to
talk to me and hopefully
I'll start digging a little
bit more. I know that
monorail is just one part
of the castle project, and
I know that I I've
given the castle project a
cursory glance in the past
and I'll have to pay
a little more attention to
it now. Thanks for taking
the time .